Jeremiah chapter 2 and verse 13,
that my people have abandoned me,
the source of living water,
and dug for themselves broken sisters
that cannot hold water.
Now we often may think,
how is it possible that Jehovah's people
after all they saw, all they experienced
could leave Jehovah and look for wisdom and support elsewhere?
And yet it happened over and over again.
Is there a lesson and a warning for us?
Well, yes, there is.
Today we appreciate so much all of the spiritual provisions
that we're receiving from Jehovah through his organization.
Travel all around the world,
and our brothers and sisters say they have never felt
closer to Jehovah's organization than they do now.
That we're receiving life-giving waters of truth
as we never have before.
But even so, just as in Jeremiah's time,
some of our dear brothers and sisters
are leaving Jehovah or have left Jehovah
in the pure waters of truth and pursued worthless things.
How can that happen?
How do we make sure that does not happen to us?
Well, did you notice the point in our text comment,
the first two sentences that says this,
it says, Satan the devil is intent on neutralizing
the life-giving guidance we receive from Jehovah.
Moreover, our own treacherous heart
could interfere with how well we respond
to Jehovah's directives.
Now, when I think of that statement,
the treacherous heart, how we respond to Jehovah's directives,
I cannot help but think of Solomon.
Now, we know Solomon's account, how Jehovah blessed him,
gave him everything he needed to be obedient,
but Solomon ended up losing his precious record with Jehovah.
He abandoned the source of living water.
Now, Solomon started off so well, what happened to him?
Well, exactly what our text is talking about here today.
He allowed his treacherous heart to interfere
with Jehovah's directives.
Now, the directives at Jehovah gave Solomon
were very, very clear.
Look, for example, in Deuteronomy, chapter 17.
And as we remember as the king,
he was supposed to read this law on a regular basis,
write this law on a regular basis.
Deuteronomy 17, verse 16 and 17.
He says, however he, in the context,
is talking about the king should not acquire
many horses for himself.
Verse 17, neither should he take many whys for himself,
so that his heart may not go astray.
Nor should he acquire vast amounts of silver
and gold for himself.
Do not acquire horses, wives, vast amounts of silver
and gold, Solomon did all three.
You look at Deuteronomy chapter 7 and verse 3.
Their Jehovah says, do not form marriage alliances
with the nations because they will lead you astray.
What did Solomon do?
Well, look over to First Kings chapter 11
and look at verses one through three.
First Kings 11, one through three,
it says, but King Solomon loved many foreign women
besides the daughter of Pharaoh, Moabite, Ammonite,
Edomite, Sidonian and Hittite women.
They were from the nations about whom Jehovah said
to the Israelites, you must not go in among them
and they should not come in among you
for they will surely incline your heart to follow their gods,
but Solomon clung to them and loved them.
And he had 700 wives who were princes and 300 concubines
and his wives gradually incline his heart,
just as Jehovah said.
Now, how did this happen?
At Solomon did not just fall into sin.
Solomon just didn't in a moment of weakness,
he didn't just wake up one day and realize, oh my word,
I have 700 wives and 300 concubines.
If he did, Solomon had more problems than we thought he did.
No, Solomon was an intelligent man.
This was a man who was blessed by Jehovah with wisdom.
How did he deviate so far?
Well, it was a series of decisions,
one after another that differed from Jehovah's directives
that somehow he was able to explain away, rationalize away
until he was completely alienated from Jehovah.
Now, we don't know what was going through Solomon's mind
or how he made those decisions,
but even from our limited perspective,
we can see how that could have happened.
Now, for example, he starts off talking
about the daughter of Pharaoh.
Now, he took the daughter of Pharaoh as a wife,
but interestingly, in 1 Kings chapter three,
it relates how Jehovah granted him all the wisdom
and blessed him.
Well, that was after he had taken the daughter of Pharaoh
as a wife.
So it was a possible Solomon thought,
you know, Jehovah's still blessed me,
this must be everything is okay.
Now, Solomon knew something wasn't quite right there
because in 2 Chronicles chapter eight, in verse 11,
it says he had to build another house for her.
She couldn't live in the house of David
because of the ark, it was holy.
She was a foreigner and couldn't live there.
He knew something wasn't quite right,
but he was able to make the decision
and rationalize it away anyway.
It says that he loved Moabite women.
As we know, the Moabites were enemies of Jehovah,
but not all of them.
For example, you may remember that when King David
was on the run from King Saul,
he asked the king of Moab
if he could bring his father and mother,
David's father and mother there,
and the king of Moab protect them.
And they did so the whole time
that David was in the stronghold the account says.
So that means the king of Moab protected Solomon's grandparents.
We also remember Ruth.
Well, Ruth was Solomon's great-great-grandmother
and she was a Moabite woman
and look how well that turned out.
And also men from Moab and Ammon were part of David's mighty men.
So they weren't all bad.
So was it perhaps through David's mighty men
or maybe from his grandparents who stayed in Moab
that he was introduced to some of his first wives from Moab?
It talks about Ammonite women.
Well, we remember Solomon's son, Rhea Bohm,
who later became King.
He was born from an Ammonite woman.
And interestingly, he was born before Solomon became King.
So again, was it possible the Solomon reason?
Well, Jehovah's bless to me.
I got an Egyptian wife and Ammonite wife.
Maybe this doesn't apply to me like it does everybody else.
But what about Sidonians?
Well, we know the Sidonians were famous for their craftsmanship.
They had outstanding abilities as loggers and lumbermen.
In fact, David's Solomon's father, David,
used the Sidonians to bring lumber in great quantity for the temple.
Solomon later established contracts with the Sidonians
to cut trees for the temple.
Well, was it through possibly some of these business relationships
that he first was introduced to some who became his wise?
Could he have reasoned that, well, you know,
marrying the Sidonian women?
Well, that'll help ensure that Jehovah's house
is completed.
This will help me fulfill my Theocratic assignment.
And just one more, what about the Hittite women?
Well, we remember Euryah.
David committed adultery with Bashiba
and had Euryah put to death.
A Bashiba became Solomon's mother.
Euryah was a Hittite and one of David's mighty men.
So that means Solomon's mother
had been married to a Hittite man.
So was it perhaps through Bashiba,
through her former in-laws or perhaps through others
where Solomon was introduced to some of his first wives
from the Hittites?
Now, we don't know what Solomon was thinking.
But we can see how it was possible for him
to begin to rationalize some of those early decisions
until he found himself on a slippery slope
completely alienated from Jehovah.
So what's the lesson for us?
Well, we read this account of Solomon,
accumulating all of those wives, all the riches,
all of those horses, and it's like watching a car crash
in slow motion.
We know exactly where it's heading,
but Solomon didn't see it coming.
So the question we have to ask ourselves is,
what would the reaction be?
If somebody was reading my life story right now,
the decisions that I am making a day to day right now.
You see, our heart, too, is treacherous.
Our heart will try to cause us to rationalize a way,
Jehovah's clear directive.
Sometimes we may rationalize a decision
because we see we're still getting blessings from Jehovah.
Or maybe rationalize a decision
because we see how it worked out for somebody else
or what somebody else is doing, dangerous.
So what do we need to do?
Well, we need to do what Solomon said
and should have done himself.
If you turn to Proverbs chapter three and verse five,
let's turn there together.
Proverbs chapter three and verse five,
is as trust in Jehovah with all your heart
and do not rely on your own understanding.
Do not rely on your own understanding,
on our own wisdom, trust in Jehovah,
follow his direction.
And if we do, we can be assured that we will never abandon
the source of living water,
but rather will benefit from his guidance for all eternity.